[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> People say, am
I against aging.
No, I want to be the youngest
98-year-old I can be.
We should end the disability
that goes with aging.
We don't have to think of aging
as being in a nursing home
or being infirm.
If you care about
aging, you care
about ending the disability
that goes with it.
We all have more than one age.
We have a calendar age.
That's the number of
birthdays we've celebrated.
But we also have a real age,
the actual age of our body,
and that can be many years older
or younger than our calendar
age.
Did you ever stop to
think that if 70-year-olds
can win Ironman contests
and 44-year-olds drop
dead of a heart attack, that
measuring aging by the calendar
may not be the best way.
And what real age
is is a process
that lets you measure
your rate of aging.
I've got a $50 bill.
Why do I have a $50 bill?
It's because this
is a system that,
like money, values your choices,
so you can make choices.
If I were to give
you this and say
you had to spend it
by tomorrow night,
what would you spend it on?
>> Probably dinner,
I'm getting hungry.
>> Dinner, you're
getting hungry.
[LAUGHTER]
We'll have to go to
a cheap restaurant,
because I'm interested in it,
too, so you've got to share.
How about you?
What would you spend it on?
>> Oh, probably food.
>> Food.
>> Vitamins.
The good thing
about this is each
of you knew what $50 would buy,
food or dinner or vitamins.
No one told me they
were going to buy a car.
Why?
Because you knew $50
wasn't enough to buy a car.
And no one told me you were
going to buy a cup of coffee
because you knew you had too
much for a cup of coffee.
And that's the real power
and potential of money.
It lets you value
your choices, so you
can make choices that
are rational for you.
And that's what we
did with "Real Age."
I worked with a
team of people who
went through and evaluated
all the studies in the world's
literature.
We evaluated over 25,000
studies and came down
with 126 factors that determine
your rate of aging in at least
four studies in
humans, and that you
can have some chance of
changing, 44 of which
are relatively easy, and we'll
cover many of them today.
So what this is is a system that
lets you value your choices.
In everything else in
life, you have numbers.
You have your income level
or your sales figures
or your grade point average.
In everything else
in life, we have
numbers that let us
value our choices
and set goals, except for
the most important thing.
That's our health.
And what we've done
with "Real Age"
is we let you make choices
because we value everything.
So when I say that flossing
your teeth is worth 6.4 years
to you, it means that if you
regularly floss your teeth,
you can actually make
yourself younger by six years.
Say, wow, and
obviously I'm picking
the most outlandish or
most outstanding one,
but preventing periodontal
disease has an amazing effect.
Periodontal disease
is the leading cause
or one of the leading causes
of your arteries getting old.
It also for the
younger women here,
preventing periodontal
disease is the best prevention
we know of for preventing
miscarriages and preventing
premature labor.
And so it's one of the
things that is strongly
correlated with
that, so flossing
is even beneficial for you.
Now that gives you an idea
of the magnitude of things.
I've got this to remind me.
Every one of us knows we should
get our immunizations, right?
But that's only
a six-day effect,
so this tells you the
value of certain things.
And if something
makes you older,
such as taking the
wrong vitamins,
buying the wrong ones,
buying ones with iron in them
if you're a man or
buying ones with too
much of certain things in
them, actually make you older.
Too much vitamin A, more than
8,000 international units
a day, make you older, and
there's no reason to do that.
That's been shown repeatedly
to make yourself older.
So what "Real Age" does is it
helps to end the confusion,
so that it could
teach you and me--
and that's the reason I wrote
it was to share it with people--
how you can get younger,
and what actually
has an effect on your health.
We're going to show some of
the science relating to this.
First is to tell us how we age.
Most of us think that if
you look at this scale,
that our quality of life
hits its peak some time,
that our quality of life hits
its peak sometime around age
28 for men, 36 for
women, and then it's
an all downhill
slope after that.
But that isn't how
it has to be, and let
me show you some of the data.
This orange line is what
I want you to follow.
That's the IQ of physicians
at Harvard as they get older.
They didn't start at zero.
That's the change in IQ.
So they decline,
and they go down,
in that the average
person goes down,
the average physician goes
down on that orange line.
That's 5% per decade.
What else declines like
an IQ at 5% per decade?
Everything else we have.
Our heart function does.
Our liver function does.
Our lung function does.
Our bone mass does,
our muscle mass.
If we don't do
anything, the developed
nations of the world,
the average decline
in every function we have
is the same as the IQ
function, 5% per decade.
But I added a key phrase,
if we don't do anything.
There's another key component,
and that's why it's in red.
It's even more key, and
that's the variability.
The variability change
swamps the decline.
What do I mean by that?
This is the real set of
curves of our quality of life.
There's a range, and
there's no reason
you have to live on the
heavy dark one, which
is the median or average.
You can live at the
top of your curve
all your life till
right before the end.
That's what the data show.
You can do it, and it's
never too late to start.
And it's much easier
than you think.
The data come from studies
that I'm going to show you.
And follow, and the way we're
able to give an age change
is data like this.
This in science talk is called
a Kaplan-Meier Survival Curve.
What does it mean?
This just shows the percent of
people alive at different ages.
And you see, if you're
a man and you're
on the average curve,
which is the blue curve,
you're on average going
to die at age 76 or 77.
That's the current men's curve.
But if you're 59
and on that curve,
your real age is 59 because
you're like the average person.
But if you're on
that maroon curve
and are doing healthy things
and going to live longer,
you're really not 59.
You're 44.
And if you're on the gray curve
and doing unhealthy things,
you're really not 59.
You're 74.
So what we did was we took every
health effect, every health
category that we
could quantitate,
that had data like this, and
put it into an age framework.
The studies that we look
at come from two sources.
One is called risk
factor epidemiology,
and the other is called
randomized controlled trials.
Let me show you an example.
Risk factor
epidemiology is this.
They took 122,000 nurses.
Are any of you part of
the Nurses' Health Study?
Well, this is the
Nurses' Health Study.
And they question them in
detail about about 200 habits,
and then they follow them
and see what happens.
And this is the years of
regular use of aspirin,
that is, 16 aspirin a
month, at least an aspirin
every other day, and
the relative risk
of colorectal cancer.
What's colorectal cancer?
It's cancer of your
large intestine.
It's the leading
cancer in America.
The more aspirin you take,
the lower your relative risk.
What does that mean?
Well, if you're
an average person,
you have a relative risk of 1.
That means your average,
your risk relative
to the average person, is 1.
To lower your risk,
the less likely you
are to get that disease.
So as you can see,
the more they took
the aspirin, the lower
their relative risk,
and it's about 0.6.
If you look at all
the studies from,
quote, "risk factor
epidemiology" and aspirin
and colorectal
cancer shown here,
you'll see that the average
relative risk, if you take
an aspirin a day, is about 0.6.
What does a 40%
reduction mean to you?
That is, if you have
an average risk of 0.6,
you've got a 40% reduction.
Well, what that means is
that you get about 0.25 years
younger if you're the
average 55-year-old female
or 55-year-old man.
It happens to be the same one.
But what are the side effects
from aspirin, an aspirin a day?
Well, the side effects are
that you're 0.25 years older.
So if the only
benefit of aspirin
were its reduction in colorectal
cancer, you shouldn't take it.
But there's a key point.
What we've done here
is we've transformed
something from relative
risk, that even physicians--
unless they concentrate on
it and really fight hard
about it--
can't explain and the
relative risk of side effects,
and turned them all into
one easy to understand
number, the age change, so
that anyone can understand it.
So they took 22,000
physicians and followed them
for five years, giving
them either a full aspirin
or not every other night.
And what happened?
There was a 44% reduction
in heart attacks
in the physician group that
was taking the aspirin.
And they stopped the
study because that
was a significant effect.
What does that mean?
Well, if you're a man
over 40 or women over 50,
what that means is that you
get about 1.9 years younger
from taking an aspirin a day.
We used to think that
heart attacks were
caused by something like
this, which is the artery--
this is the outside
wall of the artery--
build up with plaque
and getting very small,
so you didn't get
enough blood through it.
We used to think that was
what caused heart attacks.
So that by thinning the
blood, you could prevent them.
But that isn't what
caused heart attacks.
It's only in the last 10
years that we know this.
What causes heart attacks
is things like this.
This is a plaque, and you
see it busting out here.
And why does it bust out?
It gets inflamed, just like
your skin gets inflamed.
And aspirin's effect
is the same effect
that you took it
for to reduce pain.
It stops inflammation, and
so that's why aspirin works.
So when we say, we don't
know why many of these things
decrease aging, that's
absolutely the truth.
We know they change
your rate of aging.
your disability
and your quality of life.
But we, in medicine,
don't really know why yet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Did you ever think
why you get old?
It's a funny thing.
We have eight theories
on why you age,
but we don't know
why you get old.
But we do know what ages.
Your arteries get
old, and that's
associated with stroke, heart
disease, and memory loss.
>> You don't get enough
oxygen in your cells.
When your arteries get old,
you don't get enough oxygen
in your cells, and
that's absolutely true.
That's one of the three reasons.
The second major cause of aging
is immune system dysfunction.
Now your immune system
as you get older
can get either overactive
or underactive.
If it gets overactive, you
get hyperactivity diseases.
Many forms of arthritis, many
forms of endocrine disease,
such as many forms
of thyroid disease,
are caused by an overactive
immune system as you get older.
Or it can get underactive.
We have two ways we
prevent against cancer
and many immune diseases.
We have what are called
proofreader genes.
But if you've got a
proofreader gene in every cell,
that reads the other genes.
And if your proofreader
gene gets old and sloppy,
a cancer can slip through.
Now we have a second
part of our immune system
that goes and
circulates in the blood
and tries to kill those
cells before they develop
into cancers or other things.
Both of those systems get
sloppy when you get old.
But there's some easy ways
you can do things for them.
This is my favorite one.
Do you lift weights?
You should.
Do lift weights?
Good.
OK.
This is something
that women don't do.
30 minutes a week makes
you 1.7 years younger.
It's easy, and it strengthens
your immune system.
It also decreases our
tail system, aging,
and it decreases the
chance of having a hip
fracture or, in fact, falling.
Why do we get fatter
as we get older?
Well, a pound of muscle
uses 150 calories a day,
even whether you're
not using it actively,
whether you don't
know you're using it.
A pound of fat,
three calories a day.
How much muscle mass do we lose
per decade as we get older?
>> 5%.
>> 5%, right.
We lose 5% of everything,
right, if we don't do it.
But this is an easy way of
maintaining that and staying
thin.
So, one, it helps
you to stay thin.
But, two, it strengthens
your immune system
and decreases arterial
aging as well.
This is another way,
vitamin D. You're lucky.
You live in Arizona.
In Arizona, 10
minutes of sun a day,
you can convert your
native vitamin D
into active vitamin D.
Most of us don't
live in Arizona.
I'm from Chicago.
I could stay out in
the sun the whole day.
It's not at a high enough
angle to convert my vitamin D
into active vitamin D.
So one thing you can do if
you don't get sun every day,
and there are reasons
not to, is to take
vitamin D. The key
things on vitamins
are you want an
RDA multivitamin.
Some multivitamins you
don't want to take.
What don't you want to take?
You don't want to take
a multivitamin that's
got iron in it because
it disturbs, one,
the absorption of
vitamin C, but much more
importantly than that, too
much iron is bad for you.
So unless you have
iron deficiency,
unless your doctor tells
you have iron deficiency,
you shouldn't take a
multivitamin with iron in it.
Now women under the age
of menopause or women
who are still menstruating
often have iron deficiency,
so you want that checked.
But if you don't,
don't take iron.
The second thing is you
don't want too much vitamin
A. More than 8,000
international units a day
also causes you to get older.
What do you want?
The correct vitamins or a
vitamin for optimal health
are an RDA multivitamin
plus extra amounts
of the alphabet, C, D, E, and
F, plus calcium and magnesium.
And then you have to
remember the number 400.
C is vitamin C, 400
milligrams, three times a day.
Why do you need it
three times a day?
Because it's water soluble,
and you urinate it out.
So to keep a steady level, you
need it more than once a day.
>> That would be only
1,200 a day then.
>> That's 1,200 a day is what
we believe is optimal for aging.
I can go through
the, in the book,
it goes through all
the scientific evidence
of why that number is
what's optimal for aging.
It's a safe level.
It's the level that
has been shown to be
most beneficial for aging.
Now, once you get over about
500 milligrams every six hours,
there's some evidence
it does some harm.
But where the pluses
and minuses are,
we don't know where
the exact optimal is.
We do know that about 1,200 a
day reduces your rate of aging.
We have no data that says that
2,000, 4,000, or 10,000 a day
is better than that.
D is 400 international
units once a day.
E is 400 international
Vitamin F isn't vitamin F.
It's folate or folic acid.
It's one of the B vitamins.
But I remember it by the
mnemonic, C, D, E, F.
And it's 400 micrograms,
mcg, more than you'd
get in your diet once a day.
Calcium is 1,200 a day.
Again, it's 400,
three times a day,
but you don't have to
take it three times a day.
It's just easy mnemonic.
And magnesium is
400 milligrams once
a day, so C, D, E, F,
calcium, and magnesium.
We've gone over
vitamin D. C, D, E,
Folate, and a multivitamin,
that makes you
about six years younger.
These are huge effects, right?
And then there are three
components of exercise.
We went over the
strength and flexibility.
That's 1.7 years younger.
Any physical activity
makes you younger.
And then stamina activity,
you need 60 minutes a week
of getting your heart rate up
to 80% of your age-adjusted max.
If you're sweating in a cool
room, you're at 70% or more
of your age-adjusted max.
So not outside, but if
you're sweating inside,
60 minutes a week gives
you the maximum benefit,
and it's 3.4 years younger.
>> Excuse me, and this was
once a week, the 60 minutes?
>> No, it's 30 minutes of
strength activity a week.
It's 10 minutes,
three times a week
is the best way to get
it with lifting weights.
With stamina activity, it's
20 minutes or more three times
a week.
So it's 20 minutes,
three times a week.
It can't be 60 minutes at once.
We don't have data that
says you get younger.
But we do have 20
minutes, three times.
For total activity, it's 3,500
kilocals a week is the optimal.
What's a kilocal?
Well, walking at a fast rate
is around four to five kilocals
a week.
Why do they call it kilocals?
A calorie we eat and kilocal in
exercise are the same things.
They just call them differently,
whether we're consuming them
in or using them.
But in any case,
it's 3,500 you need.
That means you need
about 90 minutes
of walking or 100
minutes of walking a day.
That's an awful lot.
>> Do you have any data
on excessive exercise?
>> Yeah.
Excessive exercise, yes, there
are only two studies on it,
but they both are consistent.
Doing more than 6,500 kilocals
a week goes back to aging you.
It's presumed from antioxidant
damage or oxidant damage.
And this is vitamin
E, alpha tocopherol,
another name for
it is vitamin E.
But this tells you how
fast you get younger.
You see that you get
younger with vitamin
E. That yellow line goes above
the gray line after about half
a year, 200 days.
And by three years,
it's at its maximum.
That's one of the pearls.
You don't have to pay
much for bad behavior.
If you never flossed, if
you start flossing now,
you get the maximum
benefit in three years.
If you'd never exercised,
you get the maximum benefit
in three years.
And you start to get benefit
in about 90 days from exercise.
One of the slowest things
you get benefit from
is taking vitamins, which
appear to be about a half-year.
By the way, men need
to do physical activity
more regularly than
women as they get older
because women normally get it.
You go up and down stairs.
You vacuum.
You make beds.
Men just sit there on the couch.
So women get some activity
in their everyday life.
Men need to as well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Stress is the greatest ager.
All of us will have
major life events.
We'll have a family member
that is ill or dies.
We'll be subject to a lawsuit
or have financial trouble.
We'll have to move
or take a new job.
Any one of those makes you
eight years older in the year
after it occurs.
Three of those and
you're 32 years older.
If you think about Clinton,
he got 32 years old this year,
right?
Well, we'll come back to that.
The thing that is most
important for your arteries,
though, is your blood pressure.
How many of you know your
blood pressure numbers?
There's a machine
out here that you
can do it on the way in here.
You should know your
blood pressure numbers.
It comes as two numbers.
The upper one is higher.
It's when your heart
is contracting.
That ideally should be 115.
The lower one is when
your heart's relaxing.
It's called the diastolic.
That should be around 75.
So the goal is to be at 120,
115 over 75 or thereabouts.
How did this whole
program start?
It started by someone
who was smoking.
One of my friends--
wasn't a friend at that
time, it was a patient--
came to my office.
He was having an
operation on his leg,
and he couldn't walk from
here to 1/3 of the way
to the other side of
the room without having
to stop two or three times.
He was smoking and wasn't
getting enough blood flow
into his legs.
So he said, what's my risk, Doc?
The surgeon has told
me that I don't have
much risk because I'm only 49.
And I said, Simon,
if you were only 49,
you wouldn't have much risk.
But your smoking makes you
at least eight years older.
He said, I can't be.
And I said, why not?
And he said, because
no man in my family
has lived to their
50th birthday,
and I got a birthday
in two weeks.
So remember, my job is
partially to reassure patients.
That's the job of a physician.
So now I've done
the right thing.
So I said, Simon,
you can get younger.
If you stop smoking
today, you get
one year younger in two
months, and two years younger
in five months.
And he stopped smoking that day.
Now, I wasn't bright
enough to put it together
is how good a motivational tool
this was till about eight years
later, when I was seeing another
patient who wasn't taking
their blood pressure pills.
Now I have every
one of my patients
bring all their
pills in with them.
So he brought two bottles
of blood pressure pills.
His name was Martin.
And one of them was
half-empty, and one of them
was hardly touched.
And his blood pressure
was 140 over 90,
and they were both renewed, you
know, from the pharmacy date
on them was the same date.
And I said, Martin, you're
not taking your blood pressure
pills the way you
should, are you?
And he said, how do you know?
And I said, well, half of one
pill is, not much of the other.
He says, well, what
difference does it make?
You said, my blood
pressure is 140 over 90,
and many doctors wouldn't
even treat me for 140 over 90,
would they?
And I said, no, but it
makes you five years older
than if your blood
pressure were 115 over 75.
He said, what do you mean?
I said, you live as though--
he was 47 at the time-- you live
as though you're 52, not 47.
You live with the vigor
and vitality of someone
who's five years older.
And he said, show me the data.
He'd been a physics
major in college.
So I showed him
the data, which was
from a VA cooperative study.
And he said, how many
other things in medicine
can you do that for?
And I said, why do
you want to know?
And he said, because
this is really powerful.
People have told me
I might die a year
or two early if I don't
take my blood pressure
pills the way I'm supposed to.
But no one has told
me I live older.
And then he repeated
the question.
How many other things in
medicine can do this for?
And I said, I don't know.
And he said, how much will
it cost me to find out?
So I said, well, I know some
epidemiologists at Stanford
and some at Hopkins.
And I know the person who runs
the Health Risk Assessment
Project for the CDC
in Atlanta, Georgia.
And then we need a statistician,
because all this is,
all that curve was, is putting
net present value of health
changes just like people do net
present value of investments.
And he said, OK, how
much will that cost?
And I said, oh, about $25,000.
We'll need two meetings and
some research assistant time.
To my surprise, he
reached into his pocket,
pulled out his checkbook, wrote
a check for $25,000, and said,
I want the answer in six weeks.
Well, we gave him the
answer in about 10 weeks.
And we said, you could do
it for 60 to 70 things.
And he said, how much
will it cost to do it?
And I said, well, that's
much more expensive.
You know, that's a lot of time.
It's probably at least $10,000
for each item, maybe $50,000.
It's probably $800,000
to a million and a half.
And to my surprise, he
reached into his pocket,
pulled out his checkbook,
wrote a check for $50,000,
and said, get started.
I'll help you raise
the rest of the money,
and that's how we
started this project.
He's the one who is the
developer of the "Real Age"
website, so you can
take the "Real Age"
program free on the
web at www.realage.com.
It explains more in the
book, but the program
is doable free on
the web, and there's
some advantages, which
we'll get to in a minute,
on taking it on the web.
So blood pressure control,
huge effect, 25 years.
Stress control, up to 32 years.
Friends isn't just a TV show.
One of the great ways you
decrease the effects of stress
is group participation,
whether it's religious group
participation or social
group participation
or just having friends.
All of those things
decrease your stress.
So when something is
stressing you, call someone.
There is a reason we
gather at times of death
or at times of crisis.
And that is to
reduce our stress.
Now people always
ask me about animals.
Dogs do decrease your real age.
Do they do it through
a stress phenomenon?
Well, they decrease your
real age by about a year.
Unfortunately, cats don't.
[LAUGHTER]
The only animal that
decreases your age is a dog.
The companionship isn't
apparently what does it.
It was said better by a wise
clinician over a century ago.
Walk your dog, even
if you don't have one.
That is, the dog
regularizes your schedule,
gets you to take him out in the
morning, eat breakfast, walk.
Nutritional choices are huge.
Which is better, fat-free tomato
sauce or tomato sauce with fat?
>> With fat.
>> It turns out it's with fat.
This is a larger seller.
People have avoided fat
because it's fattening,
but we need fat.
The optimal for aging, unless
we have coronary artery disease,
is 25% of fat in our diet.
If you have coronary artery
disease that's severe,
you can reverse the
coronary artery disease
by decreasing the fat, but
you cause other problems.
But there are three
reasons you need fat,
and I like to look
at nutrition, and I'm
going to just give it
as briefly as I can.
There are 20 things you should
do for nutrition in the book.
The first of which is
eat only food you enjoy.
OK.
If you're not having fun
eating a food, don't eat it.
The second is, you want to go
nutrient-rich, calorie-poor.
What's the worst
food in America?
The worst food is white rice.
>> No, way.
>> Yeah, it's got only calories.
It has no nutrient in it.
One of the best foods
is long grain wild rice,
because it's got
the nutrients in it.
So eat the foods that
have the nutrients.
Don't eat empty calories.
That goes with pasta.
Get the whole wheat or the whole
grain pasta, not the processed
enriched flour stuff because
you lose all the nutrients
in the other stuff.
Why do you want
to eat fat first?
One is it stops your
stomach from emptying.
It slows your stomach from
emptying, doesn't stop it.
If your stomach doesn't empty
as fast, you get two benefits.
One, you don't put
anything in your intestine,
and your intestine is where
you get glucose absorption,
so you keep your
glucose level lower.
So the best way of keeping
your glucose level lower,
and high glucose ages you,
is to eat some fat first.
The second reason is, if
your stomach doesn't empty,
you feel full faster, so
you don't eat as much.
The third reason is you need fat
to absorb a lot of nutrients.
So one of the best
nutrients is lycopene.
It's the red stuff
with tomatoes.
There were four
studies in humans
that showed that 10
tablespoons a week, just 10
tablespoons a week
of tomato sauce.
What's a tablespoon
of tomato sauce?
It's the amount on
one slice of pizza.
That does not make
pizza a health food.
But 10 helpings a week
decreased the risk
of prostate cancer 40% to 50%.
Since we wrote that,
just to show you
how fast science is
moving now, there
are nine studies, five more
studies on prostate cancer,
showing the same effect, and 21
studies on nine other cancers,
including breast cancer,
that this stuff works
to decrease the incidents.
So eat a little fat first and
eat the right kind of fat.
What are the right kind of fats?
Make your fats have less feet
is the way I remember it.
Bacon from a four-legged
animal, bad fat.
Two-legged, that's
fowl, chicken, whatever,
that's kind of a neutral fat.
Even though it's
saturated, it's neutral.
Vegetable fats and
fish fats, no legs,
those are actually healthy.
What's the worst
fat you can have?
It's stick margarine, trans
fat, going from stick margarine
to olive oil with
just 50% of what
you eat, 50% of the stick
margarine and trans fat
you eat.
What is trans fat?
It's partially
hydrogenated vegetable oil.
If you substitute 50% of the fat
in your diet that is currently
trans fat, and you're
an average person
and have monounsaturated
fat, olive oil, canola oil,
avocados, that type
of thing, you actually
get four years younger.
Candy actually is a very--
not candy in general--
but chocolate.
Anything from a cocoa bean
is actually a healthy fat.
It's not-- yes-- now let me
give you the, it's only an ounce
and a half, though, is
what you should start,
if you're going to
start your meal.
>> That's OK.
>> An ounce and a half,
it's actually stearic acid.
It's a fat that's stearic.
It doesn't raise
your cholesterol.
That's a neutral
fat, if you will.
Things that are really
healthy, olive oil, canola oil,
fish oils, avocados,
all of those things
do make you younger.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
People often ask,
what's the next thing
likely to be in the program.
It may well be selenium.
It's not in there yet
because there are only
two studies in humans.
Selenium, 200 milligrams
a day, does the following.
It decreased the risk
of cancer by 50%,
and it reduced
death rate by 17%.
That would mean you're
about five years younger
than the average if you
took 200 milligrams a day.
And the US government now
through the National Cancer
Institute has five
ongoing studies
looking at selenium
supplementation
in everyday people
in areas that have
rich selenium in their soil.
So we'll know the
answer in about three
and 1/2 years on that.
Hormone replacement
therapy, a huge effect.
There's a debate
about it, right?
Everybody worries about
hormone replacement therapy.
Well, hormone
replacement therapy
is one of the most
interesting things
because it is one of the
most powerful ways you
can reduce your age.
But it also has some
significant side effects.
Let me go through
some of the data.
First of all, 50% of women stop
hormone replacement therapy
within two months
of starting it.
What's the message?
The message is, you've got
to work with your physician.
It isn't one pill fits all.
Obviously, there are
significant side effects.
Now there are three effects of
aging of hormone replacement
therapy.
One of which is that it
increases breast tissue growth
and uterine tissue growth.
Is that a good?
No, that's a bad.
Why?
Because it correlates
with breast cancer.
The second is it decreases
aging of your bones.
And the third is it's one
of the most powerful ways
of decreasing aging
of your arteries
and preventing memory loss.
The great news is we're now
getting designer estrogens that
actually decrease the
risk of breast cancer.
So in fact, I would guess in
the next two or three years,
you'll start to see hormone
replacement advertised
that does three things,
strengthens your bones,
keeps your arteries young,
and prevents breast cancer.
There are beginning to
be datas on that now.
So I think that'll
be a very good thing.
As I said, even if you're
thinking about it now
or working with it, you need
to work with your physician
because one size
doesn't fit all.
Now real age should
be as easy to obtain,
I believe, as your
weight, so you
can know what to do with it.
Is it?
Well, we want to make it that
way, so it's at realage.com.
It's a free website.
You can go there.
The long program is what
I urge you to now take.
It's 45 minutes.
But don't worry, you
can do it in modules,
so you can do five minutes
here and five minutes there
till you get all of it entered.
But the great thing is,
remember your password
because you can go back and
update your record anytime
and find out your real age.
And this is what you have to
know is your health history.
You don't have to know
everything in detail,
just what you do every day.
If you take any
supplements or vitamins,
you have to bring it with you.
If you have your
cholesterol, you
have to know your
cholesterol and your HDL
and your LDL or your total
cholesterol and your HDL.
HDL is healthy.
It takes the cholesterol
out of your blood
and gets it to the liver,
where it gets excreted.
Total cholesterol is bad.
And you have to know
your blood pressure.
Now do you have to know those?
No, if you don't know
those, it will give you
the median or average
for your age and gender.
So it'll give you
a rough number,
and then you can go back
and add those later.
Again, you know
your blood pressure.
You check the number, and
you fill out a tally sheet,
and then you add it up.
But the great benefit isn't
just that you find out
whether you're aging
faster or slower.
The great benefit is it tells
you all the things that you're
not doing that you
could do and how much
those are worth to you.
Let me give you an example.
This was a man
whose calendar age
was 42, whose real age
was 38.5 when he took it.
But you can see suggestions
underneath, increase
his social support network
and spend more time
doing strength exercises, and
he chose a number of things.
And with that, it let
him plan how young he'd
get in three years.
So while his calendar age,
three years from the time he
took the test would
go three years older,
his real age the way he
planned it would actually
get about four years younger
or five years younger,
so that in three years
from now, when he was 45,
he'd actually have a real
age of only 35 or so.
So he'd be 10 years younger
than his calendar age.
When Bob Dole and
Bill Clinton were
running for the
last election, we
didn't have the
program up on the web,
but we did have the data.
And so Newsweek asked us
to calculate their real age
and ask them the questions.
This is, I think, it's
August 19, 1996, Newsweek.
Bob Dole answered-- either
he or his physician--
answered all 191 questions.
Remember, there was
concern he was too old.
Well, he was 73 at the
time, but his real age
was 12.3 years younger,
or he was 60.7,
or Newsweek rounded
out to 61 at the time.
Bill Clinton would only answer
16 of the 191 questions.
[LAUGHTER]
I don't know how he answered.
He or his physician
wrote us a paragraph
on each of the other questions.
Bill Clinton does healthy
things in this area that
included on the sex questions.
[LAUGHTER]
But in any case, he was
about three years younger.
So people tell me, what's the
most important thing I can do.
The most important
thing you can do
is take the program, whether
in the book or on the website.
Because what's easy for you
may be difficult for me,
and vice versa.
My most successful patients
pick three or four things
they want to do.
They end up in 90 days
doing two or three of them.
They add one, and
they incrementally
add and get to feel younger.
One of those patients is someone
who's been sitting next to me
on Oprah's show for both times
I've been on Oprah's show.
And she also has been in
a number of other shows.
She's never gotten called on.
But one of these days, I'm
going to get to tell her story,
but I get to tell it here.
Donna S. is someone
whose calendar age
was 40 when she first
took the program.
Her real age was about
four years older.
She smoked, didn't
do any exercise.
She did a lot of things wrong.
But she decided to do
tough things first.
I would have never chosen these.
She said, I'm going to first
increase my physical activity.
Then I'm going to do
strength exercise.
Then I'm going to quit smoking.
Then I'm going to
do some easy things,
like taking the right vitamins,
and that's what she did.
And she's now a little
over eight months out.
And as you can see,
in three years,
she was supposed to get to
35 when her real age went
to 43, where she was
going to decrease
her age by about 12 years.
People ask about alcohol.
If you have no risk of
alcohol or drug abuse,
one to two drinks a day for
men, one drink a day for women
makes your arteries about
three years younger.
There is a risk obviously.
The risk is it increases
the risk of immune system
dysfunction.
The net balance is it's
optimal for one drink at night
for women, one to two for men.
Does the type of alcohol matter?
No, beer is the same
as wine is the same
as spirits from your artery
and immune system standpoint.
What's the key point?
Well, if you look in the
book or on the website,
there are 44 things
that are almost as
easy to do as take
an aspirin a day
or taking the right vitamins
and avoiding the wrong ones
or walking your dog.
Things as easy as wearing
a helmet when you bicycle
or not using your cell
phone when you drive.
These are things that actually
change your rate of aging,
and you can elect
to do them or not.
It's pretty easy.
And remember, it's
never too late.
Whether you're in a nursing
home or you're here,
there are always things
you can do to get younger,
and it's never too
late to get younger.
People say, am I against aging?
No, I want to be the youngest
98-year-old I can be.
We should end the disability
that goes with aging.
We don't have to think of aging
as being in a nursing home
or being infirm.
If you care about
aging, you care
about ending the disability
that goes with it.
And all of the data
that we have is
when you choose healthy things,
you not only live longer,
but you compress the period of
disability at the end of life,
so you live with
less disability.
Now there are tips of
the day on the website.
You can sign up for
a tip of the day.
I can tell you that over four
million people have taken
the program on the website.
Over 1.6 million have
taken it repeatedly.
And a little over
400,000, actually it's
almost 600,000 now, sign
up for a Tip of the Day.
And some of the Tips of
the Day we've gone over.
Know your blood pressure.
Practice a lot of safe sex.
The more sex you have for
a man, the higher quality
for women, the younger you are.
You're all doing one
thing that gets you
younger, that is increase
your level of education.
Those of you who
read while having sex
probably get the
benefits of neither.
[LAUGHTER]
So where have we been?
Age is a currency for health.
Just like you have targets you
can set in everything else,
we ought to have
targets for our health.
It's based on
survival curves that
have to be demonstrated
in human studies.
This is real science.
You can live at the
top of your curve.
You don't have to
decline 5% per decade.
That's what the data says.
Why don't people do
things before they
have a heart attack?
You probably know
someone, maybe a friend,
who's had a heart
attack or had a stroke
or had memory loss
before they did things.
And I think it's
because we don't know
the importance of things to us.
The key message is,
you greatly influence
how your genes affect you.
Diabetes Type 2 is
a genetic disease,
and it makes you 1.4 years
older every year you have it
if you have average control.
But if you do tight
control of your diabetes,
tight control of your sugar,
tight control, especially
of your blood
pressure and exercise,
you can age as
little as 1.06 years.
Or you can decrease the
aging the diabetes causes
by 80% or more.
So there's a genetic disease
that you control its effect,
and there are many
other examples.
We use numbers to
gauge our progress.
That's what real age is.
It's not new science.
All it is is letting you
know the value of each change
to you.
It motivates healthy behavior
because, like a $50 bill,
it teaches you what
each choice is worth,
so you can go and
pick those things that
are valuable to you.
We've gone over a
number that are healthy.
You can go to the website or
in the book and find many more
and choose the ones
that you want to do.
My co-author on the book
said, you don't have to worry,
you're a lot younger
because bestsellers
make you 25 years younger.
So I'm actually minus 10
and waiting to be born.
But the data is true.
The healthier your choices,
the less disability you have.
That goes with another feature.
You should know how important
each of your choices are.
And then the one that
I believe is true.
People say, I don't
have time to exercise.
I don't have time
to do these things.
Well, you show love for
the ones you care about
by doing things
that are healthy,
so you'll be there to share
the wisdom with your grandkids.
Simon just had a
second grandkid.
He called me in tears, thanking
me for the Real Age program
and motivating him
to stop smoking.
But you're there to share
your wisdom with them, rather
than them having
to care for you.
It's not selfish.
It's actually healthy.
And the other thing,
celebrate success.
When you get a year younger--
the program tells you when
you get a year younger--
when you get a year
younger, it's a great thing.
Buy yourself a new outfit.
Treat yourself to a
better bottle of wine,
a set of running
shoes or something.
You've done
something worthwhile.
If you're going to
celebrate getting older,
you might as well
celebrate getting younger.
It's a better thing.
Thank you all.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]